# Intro to Sass

Since we are beginning to make larger websites, it makes sense to break up our projects into parts and extend functionality and reusability with Sass!

---
## What is Sass?
- Sass: Syntactically Awesome Style Sheets
- Sass is a preprocessing language for CSS
    - There are many other preprocessor languages out there (LESS, Stylus, etc) 

As stylesheets are getting larger, more complex, and harder to maintain. This is where a preprocessor can help. Sass lets you use features that don't exist in CSS yet like variables, nesting, mixins, inheritance and other fun things. 
- It helps us develop CSS much more quickly and efficiently

### .sass versus .scss
There are two ways of writing Sass. Using the ```.sass``` extension and syntax or using the ```.scss``` extension and syntax.

When Sass first came out it used only the ```.sass``` extension - the syntax of which meant that you couldn't use ```;``` or ```{ }``` in the code itself, as the language relied on *indentation* only to be compiled properly. This was problematic for people with existing projects, that had tons of CSS - which meant less people were switching to using Sass. 

**The solution**

Sass then came out with the ```.scss``` extension which allowed for regular css to be placed in a ```.scss``` file. This meant for existing projects, only the files themselves have to be renamed. 

http://thesassway.com/editorial/sass-vs-scss-which-syntax-is-better 

---
## Benefits of using Sass
- Sass can concatenate and compress your styles for you, so you only have to attach one stylesheet and that means less requests to a server
- Variables in Sass make your code more consistent ( you can set up a particular set of colors at the beginning and use them throughout your project )
- Helps to make your code more modular, because you can break things down into smaller parts

---
## Setup
A ```.scss``` file is compiled into ```.css``` using a compiler. This compiler can be a command line tool like [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com/docs/assets/) or it could be a GUI application like [Prepros](https://prepros.io/) or [Livereload](http://livereload.com/). A compiler looks for the ```.scss``` extension, and compiles any Sass files into CSS for us - usually on save, or when we run a compile command explicitly. 
```
.scss  ➡  compiler(Prepros/Jekyll)  ➡  .css
```
### Prepros
To set up prepros simply create your folder structure and import statements first, then drag the  **whole project folder** into Prepros. Prepros should automatically compile your ```style.scss``` file for you into a ```.css``` file.  This will happen once you make a change to any ```.scss``` file in your project - since Prepros is now watching your project folder. 

Also don't forget to include the ```prepros.cfg``` and ```*.css.map``` file in your ```.gitignore``` file when commiting to Github. This way you dont commit the created configuration file that Prepros makes to watch your folder for changes. 

### File Structure & Partials
We usually break up our styling into modular parts, so that we can find things more easily, and make items reusable.

Your folder structure for a Sass project will look something like this: 
```
index.html
sass/
  └ style.scss    ⬅︎ This file is compiled
  └ _base.scss
  └ _mixins.scss
  └ components/
    └ _main.scss
css/
  └ style.css     ⬅︎ This file is generated by the compiler
```
---
## Partials
 The sass directory contains what are called *partials*, which are .scss files that begin with an ```_``` (underscore). 
 
For example: ```_mixins.scss```, ```_base.scss```, and ```_main.scss``` are all partial files. 

The underscore lets Sass know that the file is only a partial file and that it should not be generated into a CSS file.

#### Importing Partials
Partials are **imported** into our ```style.scss``` file using ```@import``` statements.

**style.scss**
```scss
@import 'base';
@import 'mixins';
@import 'components/main';
```
Notice when you use an ```@import``` statement, you don’t need to include the ```_``` (underscore) in the file name that you are importing.

You'll notice that the only file that is compiled into CSS is the ```style.scss```. **This is the only file that the compiler will actually turn into CSS in this example because it's the only file that is not a partial.**

---
## Variables
- **Variables** are placeholders for storing information that you want to reuse  throughout your styles
- You can store things like colors,  font-families, or any css value you think you might want to reuse
- Sass uses the ```$``` symbol to declare variables

Only variable declarations will go into ```_base.scss```. 

**_base.scss**
```scss
// Colors
$blue: #3498db;
$dark-blue: #2980b9;
$grey: #aaaaaa;
$grey-dark: #666666;
$white: #fff;

// You can use variables inside variables
$primary: $blue;
$secondary: $grey;

// Font Families
$helvetica: Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;
```

**How do we use a variable?**

In your ```_main.scss``` file you would write some normal CSS. In place of a color you delcared you might use a variable instead. This would mean if later on you want to change the color - you would only have to do it in one place and it would update everywhere in your styles that you have used the color variable. 

*Remember that we declared ```$helvetica``` in our ```_base.scss``` file already?*

**In ```_main.scss``` you might write:**
```scss
html{
    font-family: $helvetica;
}
```

**Which would compile to:**
```css
html {
  font-family: Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;
}
```
---
## Nesting
When writing HTML you've probably noticed that it has a clear nested and visual hierarchy. CSS, on the other hand, doesn't. Sass will let you nest your CSS selectors in a way that follows the same visual hierarchy of your HTML.**Never nest your selectors more than 2 levels deep to avoid overly-specific selectors.**

**In your ```_main.scss``` for example:**
```scss
.border{
  border: 1px solid #ccc;
    p{
      color: red;
    }
}
```

**Which would compile to:**
```css
.border{
  border: 1px solid #ccc;
}

.border p{
  color: red;
}
```

**We can also append nested selectors in Sass using the ```&``` symbol just before it:**
```scss
a{
  text-decoration: none;
  &:hover{
    text-decoration: underline;
  }
}
```
**Which would compile to:**
```css
a {
  text-decoration: none;
}

a:hover {
  text-decoration: underline;
}
```
---
## Mixins
**Mixins** let you define common properties once, and then re-use them over and over again. Mixins are defined using ```@mixin``` and you can make multiple css declarations within a mixin. To use a mixin in your styling simply use ```@include``` followed by the mixin name.

**We place all our mixins for the site in the ```_mixins.scss``` partial, an example of that might be for a button style, optionally you can also pass arguments to mixins so that they are resuable:**
```scss
@mixin button($bg-color){        //⬅︎ The argument passed is in the round brackets
  display: inline-block;
  margin: 1em;
  padding: .5em 1em;
  border-radius: 3px;
  text-decoration: none;
  color: #fff;
  background: $bg-color;         //⬅︎ It gets used within the mixin here
}
```
**Then you can use the mixin in your ```_main.scss```:**
```scss
.primary-btn{
  @include button(#2980b9);   //⬅︎ When we use the mixin we need to give it a bg-color
}
```
**Which would compile to:**
```scss
.primary-btn{
  display: inline-block;
  margin: 1em;
  padding: .5em 1em;
  border-radius: 3px;
  text-decoration: none;
  color: #fff;
  background: #2980b9;       //⬅︎ This is where that color argument outputs
}
```
---
## Extend
This is one of the most useful features of Sass. Using ```@extend``` lets you share a set of CSS properties from one selector to another. It helps keep your Sass very [DRY](http://www.vanseodesign.com/css/dry-principles/). 

**In your ```_main.scss``` you might have a class for border, which you can extend to other selectors:**
```scss
.border{
  border: 1px solid #ccc;
}

// Extend
ul{
  @extend .border;
}
```
**Which would compile to:**
```css
.border, ul {
  border: 1px solid #ccc;
}
```
---
## Helpful Links
- [Get Started with SASS](http://sass-lang.com/guide)
- [SASS Extended Documentation](http://sass-lang.com/documentation/file.SASS_REFERENCE.html)
- [How to Structure a SASS Project](http://thesassway.com/beginner/how-to-structure-a-sass-project)

##### Helpful Things for writing Sass
- [Tiffany's Favourite Base/Mixins](https://github.com/tiffanytse/base-and-mixins)
- [Getting Started with Sass - Presentation by Tiffany Tse](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1wbeYMqc8qfXl4Ngye94adIArUdkinFixTjFv19_FG4A/edit?usp=sharing)

